Add manual review page in External Security Reviews framework. (#183)
security-alliance/frameworks: src/external-security-reviews/smart-contracts/manual-review.md

---
tags:
  - Security Specialist
  - Operations & Strategy
  - SRE
contributors:
  - role: wrote
    users: [the-caliber]
---

# Manual Review

> Manual review of a smart contract is the process where a security engineer carefully reads through the source code to identify potential vulnerabilities, logic errors, and design flaws.

Author: What about this ? `Manual review of a smart contract is the process of carefully examining the source code to identify potential vulnerabilities, logic errors, and design flaws.`

---
tags:
  - Security Specialist
  - Operations & Strategy
  - SRE
contributors:
  - role: wrote
    users: [the-caliber]
---

# Manual Review

Manual review of a smart contract is the process of carefully examining the source code to identify potential vulnerabilities, logic errors, and design flaws.
The approach to manual review can vary from person to person or team to team. This document outlines some of the possible things the process can comprise.

## Gather resources  

1. **Scope:**  
This can be a link to the code repository. e.g. Github, Gitlab link which consist of all the smart contracts required to be reviewed.

2. **commit hash:**  
Agree on a specific commit hash from the repository and freeze the previously defined scope. Avoid continuous modifications to the codebase. Any changes should be communicated, and the commit hash should be updated for the code under review.

3. **Documentation and specification:**  
    - Documentation describes how the code works, how to use it, and its expected functionality.
    - Specification defines the exact requirements, constraints, and behaviors the system must meet, including invariants that must always hold true.

>         - Invariant is the property of the system that should always hold. Invariants can be useful for checking the expected behavior of the system when the certain actions or a transaction flow is executed. Invariants are useful in many testing approaches, including manual reviews, where a reviewer checks whether a specific property can be violated for a function under any sequence of function calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - Invariants are the properties of the system that should always hold. Invariants can be useful for checking the expected behavior of the system when the certain actions or a transaction flow is executed. Invariants are useful in many testing approaches, including manual reviews, where a reviewer checks whether a specific property can be violated for a function under any sequence of function calls.
```

>         - Get simplified math formulas if the protocol has any custom/fancy formulas implemented.

Reviewer: Just a though, but do we want to add like a "tips!" section at the bottom / top for these?  Since it's a good point to make, and will be helpful, but also doesn't really fit here?

I don't feel strongly about this, was just an option.

Author: Okay.

By this:
> It's relevant enough that it fits here

I assume you also find this point relevant in the `Documentation and specification`. So I kept it as it is for now.

Still let me know if i misunderstood and you wanted to say something else.

Reviewer: You understood correctly - seems good!

4. **Tests:**  
Tests are important for understanding the expected behavior and ensuring that the system works as intended. The following types of tests can be useful for understanding and verifying the code:  

>     - [unit tests](../../security-testing/unit-testing.md): Unit tests ensure that individual functions behave correctly under expected conditions.

Reviewer 2: Oh, I completely missed that on Patrick's merge! Yes, can you add them both to those files please? It will fix this as robert is mentioning.

>     - [unit tests](../../security-testing/unit-testing.md): Unit tests ensure that individual functions behave correctly under expected conditions.

Author: Done. updated both `Summary.md.develop` and `Summary.md.main`

Also for SUMMARY.md

> SUMMARY.md was behind (I know it should be only used for local testing/hosting mdbook as you said). So I thought it is a good practice to keep it updated because when others will pull the repo to locally test it they will be confused by seeing differences in the outline.
> 
> Please let me know if keeping the SUMMARY.md.develop updated (and adding it in PR) creates any problems.

>     - [unit tests](../../security-testing/unit-testing.md): Unit tests ensure that individual functions behave correctly under expected conditions.

Reviewer: Good call - keeping it updated's probably best.

    - When math formulas or complex interconnected calls are involved, debugging the values of variables helps sometime to see how the state changes are happening e.g. what is the value of variable `x/totalStakedEth` before the specific internal/external call. or what it becomes after that call.  
    - Debugging can be done in many ways. depending on which framework you are using. Some examples are.  
        - Foundry - native debugger, console logs in the contracts, Tenderly debugger, simbolik.  
        - Hardhat - console logs in the contracts, debuggers like Hardhat-tracer, Tenderly debugger.  

2. **Choose least dependent contract to review one by one:**  
  This can be done by looking into a diagram and current understanding of the smart contract functionality. For example in this case it's a Token contract that is least dependent ( in fact the functionality from that contract is getting used in other contracts so other smart contracts are dependent on it).

3. **Checklist reviews:**  

>     - Known smart contracts vulnerabilities.

Author: Added. Since the SWC is not maintained I mentioned some others. Suggestions are welcome. Changes should look like:

3. **Checklist reviews:**  
    - Known smart contracts vulnerabilities.
    - Project specific checklists (e.g. When dealing with bridges it's also important to check bridge specific checklists).
    - Checklists may vary over time and can become outdated. Below are some examples for reference:
        - [Smart Contract Security Field Guide](https://scsfg.io/hackers/)
        - [Smart Contract Security Verification Standard](https://github.com/ComposableSecurity/SCSVS?tab=readme-ov-file#table-of-contents)

>     - Known smart contracts vulnerabilities.

Reviewer: yep, those seem good!  It's just nice to link to external resources - give people more information.

>     - Known smart contracts vulnerabilities.

Author: Yes makes sense! 
Resolving this!

    As can be seen below, everything boils down to each path. Even the ternary expression is ultimately a path.  

    ```solidity
    // It may lack a general meaning, but it aims to demonstrate the code with multiple execution paths.
    function withdraw(uint256 amount, bool emergency) public {
            require(amount > 0, "Withdraw amount must be greater than 0");
            uint256 balance = balances[msg.sender];
            bool success;

            if (emergency) {
                success = (address(this).balance >= amount) ? payable(msg.sender).send(amount) : false;
            } else {
                if (balance >= amount) {
                    balances[msg.sender] -= amount;
                    totalBalance -= amount;
                    success = payable(msg.sender).send(amount);
                } else {
                    success = false;
                }
            }

            if (!success) {
                // call other contract to handle failed withdrawal
            }
            emit Withdrawn(msg.sender, amount, success);
    }
    ```  

>     In next example, because every value (`_amount`, `minRequired`) can go above and below, the results can vary. If the result is used for some operations like decreasing the `drivingScore` in `burnFuelAndReduce()` for example.

Author: Used `increase or decrease` instead of `above and below`

>     In next example, because every value (`_amount`, `minRequired`) can go above and below, the results can vary. If the result is used for some operations like decreasing the `drivingScore` in `burnFuelAndReduce()` for example.

Reviewer: Sorry!  Didn't notice this one.

Yep, `can increase or decrease` makes more sense.  Or `varies` - but whichever works.

    E.g. depending on the amounts are same (as they were while filling the fuel) or increased or decreased, the value of `fuelReduction` will change and while subtracting it from the `drivingScore[msg.sender]` it needs to be handled accordingly. which also creates different paths.

    ```solidity
    function fillFuelAndCalculate(uint256 _amount) public {
            require(_amount > minRequired, "ERR");
            fuelTank[msg.sender] += _amount;
            drivingScore[msg.sender] += (_amount * multiplier) / minRequired;
    }

    function burnFuelAndReduce(uint256 _amount) public {
            fuelTank[msg.sender] -= _amount;
            uint256 fuelReduction = (_amount * multiplier) / minRequired;
            drivingScore[msg.sender] = drivingScore[msg.sender] > fuelReduction ? drivingScore[msg.sender] - fuelReduction : 0;
    }
    ```

7. **Write down notes, doubts and edge cases:**  

> One reason for writing down doubts, ideas, possible issues is, when you start going through these issues as you encounter new path you can see more doubts, possible issues in your mind. so sometimes it becomes a loop where you will keep thinking about new ideas while exploring previous/current one.  

Reviewer: Replacing the use of "doubts" with questions, since I think that's more accurate to the meaning you want to convey.  "doubts" to me implies that you doubt your understanding, whereas questions are questions about the code.

    ## ContractName2.sol
    *This contains doubts/points/research/potential bugs regarding the ContractName2.sol*
    ...

    ---
    ## Questions for developers:
    1. Explanation for formulas.
    2. Questions about intended logic.
    3. ...
    ```

## Functional testing  

1. Check any missing test cases that should be covered.  

2. Write and test edge cases from notes taken while manually reviewing contracts.  

## Automated review  

While automated review can be classified as a different approach from manual review, it is useful to use techniques such as [static analysis](../../security-testing/static-analysis.md) to identify low-hanging bugs by triaging warnings from tools like [Slither](https://github.com/crytic/slither), [Wake](https://github.com/Ackee-Blockchain/wake), [aderyn](https://github.com/Cyfrin/aderyn) etc.

> There are other types of automated testing approaches, such as [Fuzz Testing](../../security-testing/fuzz-testing.md) and [formal verification](../../security-testing/formal-verification.md), can also be helpful at different stages of the audit life-cycle, though they are less directly related to manual review.

## Report writing  

> 1. **Doubts and issue discussion with internal team:**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Questions and issue discussion with internal team:**  
```

Discuss any doubts and identified issues with the internal team or, if applicable, with the team of reviewers working in parallel on the project. This will help you reach a conclusion.  

> 2. **Doubts and issue discussion with the developers or project team:**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Questions and issue discussion with the developers or project team:**  
```

Discuss and convey issues to the developers or project teams, as applicable. The goal is the technical dev. members of team should get issues so they can try to fix them. It can save time in large projects once the report is delivered.  

3. **Report writing:**  
    While the structure of a report and the issues/bugs it documents may vary, the following elements are helpful to include:
    - Public link to the code repository.
    - The commit hash pointing to the recently reviewed commit.
    - Issues can include a detailed description, recommendations, severity, status, the commit where the issue was fixed, and acknowledgments from developers.
    - References to correct functions and line numbers while writing issues.
    - Example and POC, helpful for critical bugs.
    - Checking the grammar/style for better readability.

> ## Fixed code review  

Reviewer: By fixed code, do you mean like code fixed to a specific commit has / release?  Or something else

Author: By `Fixed code review` I mean. The updated code received from the developers after the reviewer provides initial audit report to them.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I agree, this is actually called a recheck btw. You could go with: "Recheck - updated code review" or something explicit like that.

Reviewer 2: Nah, it's ok!

> For checking fixed code, it may be necessary to repeat previously performed actions, depending on what has changed. Some actions can include:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For checking fixed code, it may be necessary to repeat previously performed actions, depending on what has changed. To avoid repeating work, you can:
```

1. **Code comparison:**  

> This helps in identifying updates and detecting deviations from expected changes. For example, on a visual level, changes may be observed in functions that were not expected to change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This helps in identifying updates and detecting deviations from expected changes. For example, a git diff may reveal changes in functions that should not have been changed.
```

I think this is what you mean by visual level?  "Oh no - the onlyAdmin function shouldn't show a diff"

> 2. **Reviewing updated code:**  

Reviewer: This feels like the same as point 1 - is it?  If so, might as well remove it / combine the two
